---
title: "'Execution' I: The actual death penalty"
excerpt: "A brief summary of the current state of the death penalty, and a consideration of the basic state of the debate"
comments: true
categories: 
  - death penalty
tags:
  - death
  - politics
---

(This post is one of a series on the death penalty. You can find the others [here](/categories/#death-penalty))

I recently spoke in a public debate on the abolition of the death penalty, arguing against abolition. In researching my position (a position which I wouldn't defend in private conversation) I realized that the debate over state executions has far broader consequences than I anticipated and that the scholarship is overtly one-sided.

A brief survey of the literature turns up many texts on the history of the death penalty and on strategies for abolition, but very few "pro death penalty" texts. In general the "academic stance" is one of opposition, and the focus of most scholarship is not even _why_ we ought to eliminate the death penalty so much as _how_ to effect that goal.

Also frustrating is that nearly every text in support of the death penalty cites the Bible. I found it bothersome that works of analytical philosophy would use citations of sacred texts in addressing an audience of (presumable skeptical, agnostic at best) philosophers. At the very least, this is poor rhetoric, or worse poor reasoning.

I hope to compile some of the disparate thoughts I've had about the death penalty in this series. Each post will treat an aspect of the debate: a popular argument, a frame through which to view the death penalty, a historical trend.

Thoguh the stance I adopted for the sake of the debate was anti-abolitionist, I am not myself convinced by that party's arguments, and will try to present arguments on both sides with equal skepticism.

As I will explain below, there are also pragmatic concerns regarding the actual application of the death penalty, independent of the philosophical aruguments I will later forward, which militate against its application. This evidence is not enough to require abolition, per se, but would likely support a moratorium on executions in the United States.

### Capital punishment today

State use of capital punishment has been in decline in the 20th and 21th centuries. After the World Wars, a European nations successively moved to ban the use of capital punishment (for war- and peacetime offenses), sometimes as a prerequisite for becoming a member of the EU. Since 2009, the only exception has been Belarus.

All Latin American states, Canada, and 19 US states have banned the use of capital punishment in peacetime. Australia, New Zealand, and about half of the African nations have also banned it.

The United States, too, saw a nationwide hiatus in executions from 1967 to 1976 due to the 1976 ruling of Furman v. Georgia, which struck down capital punishment statutes and reduced all pending death sentences to life sentences, although it did not declare the death penalty to be unconstitutional per-se. Executions resumed following the 1977 reinstatement of the constitutionality of the death sentence and increased in subsequent years. 

Thus, in the "developed world," the 31 US states and the federal government are unusual in their retention of the death penalty, which has been a topic of heated public debate.

In the United States, approval for capital punishment hovers around 50-60%. The supreme court has continued to apply ever tighter restrictions on the application of the death penalty: it may not be mandatory, it may not be applied to those who offended as minors, and may not be applied to the insane, and generally may not be applied for non-capital crimes. These rulings are in keeping with the doctrine that the death penalty is not inherently cruel and unusual, although its application should be restricted.

### Discrimination

Of the practical concerns regarding the application of the death penalty, racial bias among the most concerning. The death penalty, pre-Furman, shows a strong bias towards executing Blacks, and some scholars have linked its application to the practice of racially based lynching.

Post-Furman, it is generally accepted that there is no significant racial bias on the _perpetrator's_ race, but there is bias on the _victim's_ race, in executions for capital crimes. The state, in general, is more likely to execute if the victim is white than if the victim is black. This is a troubling indication that perhaps, statistically "Black Lives (don't) Matter" when it comes to the lives of murder victims.

Nonetheless, the same study shows that the total rate of execution for whites is about twice that of the rate of execution for blacks (7.8% vs 3.8%).

Furthermore, the supreme court has ruled that while the presence of a racial bias should be rectified, it is not in itself cause to reason that the death penalty is unconstitutional.

### Costs

The death penalty is enormously expensive in the United States, primarily due to legal costs associated with the complex capital appeals process. Nonetheless, 11% of executees post-Furman were volunteers (i.e. they waived their right to present mitigating evidence at their sentencing trial). Their legal costs are undoubtedly less.

While studies on the cost of housing an inmate for life (and most are not in fact housed for the remainder of their natural lives) vary in their estimates, most agree that, as implemented and for most kinds of criminals, the costs associated with execution are greater than those of life imprisonment.

### Minimal invasion?

Barring all practical concerns, what should the minimal presumption be? That is, on which side does the burden of proof lie?

On the one hand, consider the argument forwarded by Kramer (Ethics of Capital Punishment) on behalf of Beccaria that on basic principles of liberal democracies, the state may not use its power capriciously and must not use it unless it can be proved to achieve some justifiably sought public aim (which, by the principle of democracy, government agents must be licensed to seek by their constitutents). This manifests itself in the Principle of Minimal Invasion: the state must use the least invasive means possible to achieve its legitimate goals.

On the other, consider a Hobbesian characterization of the state as a sovereign which fundamentally derives its power from its monopoly on lethal force, a monopoly which can hardly be effectively used to promote civil order without actually killing. Here, killing is an inevitable act of the state.

While we cannot doubt that the states kill, most now also use softer tools to control human life: welfare, regulation, indoctrination. Perhaps the state has become a Foucauldian "bio-power" involved in "fostering/letting die." Whether this move has any bearing on the death penalty (whether it implies shirking the sovereign power of "killing/letting die") it represents a move towards "lesser invasion" inasmuch as killing is the ultimate bodily invasion.

It seems that the burden of proof, thus, should be upon advocates of the death penalty to demonstrate that no lesser sanction serves the same aims.

Already apparent is the relationship between the death penalty and the theory of sovereignty, which will be taken up in the next post.

