---
title: "\"My Neighbor Totoro\" still moves me"
excerpt: "A favorite childhood film now feels sad. What changed?"
comments: true
categories: 
  - film
tags:
  - review
  - Doc Films
  - Studio Ghibli
---

On Saturday evening (1/27) I went to see "My Neighbor Totoro" at UChicago's student-run film society, Doc Films, in a special 30th anniversary screening.

Totoro was my introduction to Japanese animation and I have fond memories of watching it as a child. Like the protagonistic sisters Satsuki and Mei, I spent many summer days playing outside in gardens, forests or marshes, hoping to catch a glimpse of Totoro or at least a rabbit or two.

As the familiar plot unfolded, I grew nostalgic yet confused. At moments when I was holding back tears, first time viewers (or so I presume) were laughing around me. The sadness was momentary, but the incongruity confirmed to me that the film which I had loved a child was in some way lost. More precisely, my eyes had changed.

(The following review contains spoilers)

### Responsibilities

We meet the Kusakabe family (Satsuki, Mei, and father Tatsuo) aboard an improbably laden jalopy, rattling its way through the Japanese countryside. We can later infer that they are moving to a house closer to the hospital where their mother is convalescing. The predominant affect is one of radiant joy. Tatsuo stands with his arms akimbo, wearing a pleased smile. Satsuki and Mei laugh as they cartwheel around the yard.

In the first scenes, it is Satsuki, not her father, who seems to does most of the moving. As will later learn, the father is well meaning but absent minded. While this mental and physical absence don't seem negligent, it is telling that he is absent both times Mei goes missing, the first time buried in papers, the second time  off at the university. On each occasion, it falls upon Satsuki to recover her sister.

Satsuki's acceptance of familial responsibility appears heartfelt. She certainly never resents or questions duty, just as every character in Totoro (in a properly Japanese way) seems to play their proper working role.

Though Satsuki is in late elementary school at the latest, for much of the film she acts _in loco parentis_, most critically when Mei goes missing the second time.

Satsuki blames herself, and runs for miles looking for Mei, following the same roads as the moving truck did some months before. This time, though, she is utterly alone. A farmer is of no help. Two passers-by on a motorcycle offer little more than surprise at the great distance that she has run. This moment pained me, but elicited laughs from the theater. 

The ordeal is soon over, though, as Totoro and his companions swoop in to up the loose ends in a deus-ex-machina.

In the closing scene, the mother jokes that she wants to "spoil" the children for a while when she comes home. They all laugh, everything seems back to normal. But how could it be?

Having so lately contemplated the death of her sister and mother, how could Satsuki just "go back to normal?"

### "Let's laugh to keep ghosts away"

Near the beginning of the film, the girls and their father are taking a bath when a miraculously strong wind shakes the house. Their father puts on silly faces and tells them (as subtitled) "let's laugh to keep the bogeymen away." Their forced laughs turn to real ones as they play in the bath.

As I watched this scene I felt uncomfortable. The father's antics are merely a distraction: the emotion is forced. The fear cannot be real if our laughter is, so goes the axiom. But this attitude, the one which he continues to employ, is an ineffective form of nostalgia for an irrecoverable past.

Laughter sublimates worry, but ultimately cannot resolve its root causes. Tatsuo cannot inhabit his daughters' world: he can only view it. And inasmuch as he is not an imanent participant in their internal emotional lives, he cannot air their innermost feelings more than any other adult.

### Embodying Totoro

Satsuki is the only ensemble member who meaningfully reflects on the possibility of loss (crying by the well). Perhaps this is why it is also she is also most able to interface with the magical world of "Totoro," interacting with him when loss seems to be at hand.

Satsuki first encounters Totoro in a moment of despair, after her father fails to return home on the bus. Before departing, Totoro gives the girls a package of seeds, and when their father returns moments later their excitement at meeting Totoro has washed away their worry and fatigue. Later, Totoro and company help Satsuki and Mei sprout those seeds while they sleep, "setting down roots" in their new home. 

Totoro embodies the way that imaginative play helps children to resolve worries which are beyond their capacity to express. Satsuki and Mei turn challenging situations into adventures with Totoro, allowing them to work through difficult emotions.

### Teleology

Perhaps this (admittedly bizarre) reading of Totoro as a sort of friendly bogeyman, an embodiment of childhood anxieties is self-indulgently autobiographical. 

But, as a more reasoned explanation, I'll instead air some thoughts on the similarities between Totoro and Spirited Away, arguing that key themes introduced in the former are only fully explored in the latter.

Both feature a strong female protagonist (Satsuki/Chihiro) who, while moving, enters a mystical land where her feelings of alienation and dislocation become embodied in fantastic beings (Totoro/Spirits) which she must supplicate in order to overcoming her fears and set down roots in her new home.

Viewed in this sense, Spirited Away is by far the more effective film. There, we feel a loneliness in Sen/Chihiro that we only glimpse in Satsuki, and the thematic material is much more evenly worked, the cast pruned to place the focus on the central drama of the heroine: the object of care, Mei replaced by Chihiro/Sen's parents, turned into pigs (the time that they are pigs is akin ot the time that the father is at the university) and the token character of the ailing mother is cut altogether.

To compare the films is to suggest a teleological concept of Ghibli's filmography. This argument is indefensible, but maybe it's an interesting supposition on this, the thirtieth anniversary of Ghibli's most beloved film.

### What's wrong with cute?

Totoro remains popular with good reason. At least for me, the luminous settings and earnest characters remind me of the magical (if perhaps totally imaginary) summers of childhood. Yet others, like that of Mei sitting by solemn stone statues on a forlorn hillside in the setting sun, or of Satsuki frantically search for her sister, remain as well, unsettling me still.

I had hoped that Totoro would revive those childhood joys. Still charming as ever, Totoro had a different tone for me. I hope that it will be as different the next time.