---
title: "'On Executions' II: How to Argue for the Death Penalty"
excerpt: "A brief summary of the current application of the death penalty the burden of proof"
comments: true
categories:
  - death penalty
tags:
  - death
  - politics
---

(This post is one of a series on the death penalty. You can find the others [here](/categories/#death-penalty))

This post arrives long after the first in the series, and in has taken on many forms in successive drafts.

In surveying many arguments for and against the death penalty, I realized taht there are consistent themes, common structural problems or fallacies, which suggest an approach which groups arguments by class.

One taxonomy of death-penalty arguments groups them on which premises they require.

Define a "legal execution" of P as
1. a state killing of P
2. under the deliberative rule of a criminal justice system (not extrajudicial, non-accidental)

We may also include

3. performed in response to a crime committed by P

although we will see that this is controversial.

Clearly, there are other situations which are called "executions" which are clearly wrong. Few contest the amorality of a government which randomly kills its citizens without due process (omitting 2). 

Likewise, we are not talking about individual killings (omitting 1). Inasmuch as the debate is primarily a debate about laws and legislation, crimes like vengeful murder fall outside of the realm of legal executions.

Premise 3 is critical. In its absence, we may legitimize state killing of people who did not commit any crimes. While unappealing, some are content with this outcome, provided certain conditions. But this proves to be the downfall of many arguments in favor of the death penalty.

### Deterrence