---
title: "'Execution' II: The Killing State"
excerpt: "The political death penalty"
comments: true
categories: 
  - death penalty
tags:
  - death
  - politics
---

(This post is one of a series on the death penalty. You can find the others [here](/categories/#death-penalty))

The basic question is

    When may the state execute?

where we define an "execution" as
1. a state killing
2. under the deliberative rule of a criminal justice system (not extrajudicial, non-accidental)

This post will reflect on the first premise.

### Non est potestas super terram ...

According to Hobbes, the state is a sort of "conglomerate man" which holds a monopoly on the use of violence. Killing being the most severe form of 


___

Some associated questions:
1. What is the state?
2. What is do we mean by "killing?"
3. Who is being killed?
4. On what grounds?

In practice, the answers to first three questions are something like
1. Liberal democracies
2. Lethal injection, hanging
3. Individuals who are believed to have committed heinous crimes

The fourth question is normative, not descriptive. Intuitively, we may 


It is a fact that states kill. most now also use softer tools to control human life: welfare, regulation, indoctrination, in the manner of a Foucauldian "bio-power" which is now involved in "fostering/letting die" as well as "killing/clemency. One way to view this shift is as a move towards "lesser invasion" inasmuch as killing is the ultimate bodily invasion. In light of this, the burden of proof seems to be on advocates of the death penalty, to demonstrate why no less invasive measure serves the same public aim. Already apparent is the relationship between the death penalty and the theory of sovereignty, which I will take up in a later post.
