---
title: "'On Executions' II: How to Argue for the Death Penalty"
excerpt: "A brief summary of the current application of the death penalty the burden of proof"
comments: true
categories:
  - death penalty
tags:w
  - death
  - politics
---

(This post is one of a series on the death penalty. You can find the others [here](/categories/#death-penalty))

How might we convincingly argue for the death penalty before an audience of left-leaning college students?

Having never myself heard such an argument, I browsed the philosophical/sociological literature, which was disappointing. Most authors who have written in favor of the death penalty repeat a few tired arguments, at times citing scripture (actually, scriptural citations were almost universal) and generally missing the complexity of the debate.

Most people would agree that killing is generally wrong. So why my the state do it? and why may it kill criminals, in particular? I follow Hugo Bedeau and Matthew Kramer in assuming that the burden of proof lies on those who favor executions. That is, in the absence of some convincing justification for execution, we should use some lesser sanction.

The relevant question, then, is "why execution, rather than any less severe sanction?" The supporter of executions must therefore show that no sanction less severe than death will serve whatever necessary public purpose that punishment aims at.

While I won't go into too much detail regarding the difficulty of this claim, I'll simply say that it's tricky to calibrate such an argument. Below I'll propose an argument, based on the "purgative argument" articulated by Matthew Kramer in "The Ethics of Capital Punishment."

### Evil People

