---
title: "Is Grief a Mental Ilness?"
excerpt: "Responding to an informal talk by Agnes Callard on valuing"
comments: true
categories: 
    - philosophy
tags:
    - Valuing
    - Agnes Callard
    - symposium 
---

Until its fifth and most recent edition of 2013, Diagnostics and Statistics Manual, the American Pschiatric Association's diagnostic handbook included a "bereavement exception."

Perhaps this is what Agnes Callard had in mind at the informal seminar she held on 3/2 at a University of Chicago undergraduate dorm. Callard associate professor of philosophy at The University and author "Aspiration: The Agency of Becoming" (2017, OUP). 

We began with an explanation of the Hybrid Theory of Valuing (hence H). H tries to explain what it means to value something. H aims to me a necessary and sufficient condition for "full-fledged-valuing" the disposition that we may have to our friends, or that a classical music lover may have to attending the symphony. On H, it is not enough to simply believe that classical music is valuable. According to H, valuing classical music is different from merely believing that it is valuable.

On H, full fledged valuing of a thing A involves three things

1. Belief that A is valuable (in a general sense)
2. Desire for A
3. Emotional vulnerability towards A (The nature of this disposition was not made abundantly clear, but it may not matter)

Callard claimed that this description of valuing is held by most philosophers working in the field.

The focus of the talk was not the theory of valuing explicity, but an argument which drew reached an "undesirable" conclusion with H as a predicate. Callard presented the argument roughly as follows.

>Suppose that we hold the Hybrid Theory of Valuing, H. When we lose something or someone we value, we can no longer fulfill the second condition of H because we cannot desire what we know to be impossible (i.e. the bringing about of that which was lost). This form of valuing is also defective because it causes us pain. Nonetheless, we may sensibly say that we still value what is lost (e.g. I value my relationship with my father, now dead). But, inasmuch as this assertion opposes the truth of H, and causes us pain, it is best described as a form of mental illness.

In speculation, Callard also wondered whether we could thus dub _all_ negative emotions to be a form of mental illness. We can summarize the conclusions thus:

>C: Bereavement is a form of mental illness

>D: (strong form) all negative emotions are mental illness

Callard invited us to attempt to avoid these conclusions by rejecting a premise or an argument made along the way.

### Response

I believe that C and D are both true, inasmuch as question of the line between "mental illness" and "neurotypicality" is an empty question. It is a state of affairs about which we may know all the facts, even without reaching a conclusive diagnosis of "mental illness." Even accepting the tenuous premise that levels of sadness, worry or other neurotic emotinos can be directly compared, the appropriate level of neuroticism is partly a matter of personal preference.

We all need some fear, for example fear of being hit by cars when hit when crossing the street, in order to go on living. When these fears are overwhelming and not in accordance with the real threats, perhaps we are deeply afraid of being injured even when sitting at home alone, we call this a mental illness. 

Suppose that I worry incessantly, but I also consider my worry to be one of my greatest traits, perhaps even a skill, although it sometimes, even often, interferes with ability to carry out necessary tasks. Even of my level of "objective" concern is overmuch, by comparison to the preferences of others, this doesn't seem to be a mental illness. Perhaps we would just say that such a person is "type A."

So, while I believe that we should hold C and D, with the understanding that they are not what matters, I believe that we should also reject the line of reasoning which Callard presented. We should hold C and D on other grounds.

### Temporality

Over the course of my life, I may value different things at different times, I may begin and cease to value things, and I may value only particular instances of things.

Consider the following case

>As a child, I was ignorant of various dangers, and behaved recklessly. I genuinely valued those reckless acts, but now that I know better I no longer value them.

---

The talk focused on an arguemnt arising from a theory of what it means to "value" something that led to an ostensibly repugnant conclusion. Callard called the theory the "hybrid theory of valuing." I present the theory, which Callard asserts is commonly accpeted by those in the field, to the best of my memory. 

On the Hybrid Theory, full fledged valuing of a thing A involves three dispositions

1. Belief that A is value (in a general sense)
2. Desire for A
3. Emotional vulnerability towards A (The nature of this disposition was not made abundantly clear, but it may not matter)

In conflict with this kind of valuing are situations of "value breakdown"

- Case 1: My father dies. I still value him, a fact evinced by my grief. But I fail to meet the desire requirement because I cannot desire what is impossible: I cannot desire to bring about his presence.
- Case 2: As a student, I strongly valued having a career in philosophy, but when I realize that there are no jobs in my AOS, I am crushed. My emotional response signals that I have a kind of value for the thing, but like how I cannot desire a dead relative, I cannot desire what I believe to be impossible.

Callard then suggested the following exploratory line of argument.

In these cases, valuing is in some way defective, for our valuing of the thing in question leads us to experience mental injury. These kinds of mental injury have all the characterstics of mental illness, but they are caused by normal everyday occurrences. So we are forced to suppose that all negative emotions (or at least a large part of them) are mental illness.

Callard seemed to think that most would be reluctant to accept such a conclusion. I am not. It seems to me that mental illness are matters degree, not of kind. While neurotic or irrational thoughts are the characteristic of mental illnesses, they are present in all minds. We all need some fear, for example fear of being hit by cars when hit when crossing the street, in order to go on living. When these fears are overwhelming and not in accordance with the real threats, perhaps we are deeply afraid of being injured even when sitting at home alone, we call this a mental illness.

### Is value-breakdown defective?

One way in which we can break the aforementioned line of reasoning is to argue that the kind of valuing in Cases 1 and 2 are not full fledged valuing. I believe that this is not necessary. In Case 1, I believe that what we mean when we say that we value 