---
title: "Debate: Assisted Suicide, Part I"
excerpt: "Evaluating and extending a debate on the \"right to die\""
comments: true
categories: 
    - philosophy
tags:
    - suicide
    - assisted suicide
    - right to die
    - debate
---

(The first of two posts, in which I describe my fellow debaters' arguments and respond to them)

Some weeks ago, spoke in a debate on the motion "people have a right to die," arguing that people have a right to die: essentially, that physician assisted suicide should be legal, and that suicide is not necessarily immoral or always irrational.

Three others spoke in the debate, two as members of the organiziation "Students for Life" and one (like me) as an independent speaker. All three gave nuanced arguments which I feel that I failed to address in my speaking time, setting aside the incoherent exposition of my own views.

So I wish to try again, summarizing the arguments of the other debaters to the best of my ability, responding to them, and formulating a response. This is, of course, not entirely fair. In writing, I have the advantages of hindsight and contemplation not available to the other speakers during their ten minutes of speaking time. Nonetheless, I hope that my synopses and responses are fair.

### The motion

Although the motion of the debate uses the phrase "right to die," it was actually a debate on the ethics and politics of physician assisted suicide and other forms of "euthanasia" or mercy-killing. While we may try to answer moral and political questions in the language of rights, that language is not fundamental to the nature of the issue.

I believe that the having "right to die" is a euphemism, not a deep metaphysical truth that reveals something of what is right or good. We should care about whether we act rightly, and whether society is organized in the best possible way. So I will address those questions without assuming the language of rights.

___

### Against a right to die: Students for Life

The two speakers who were members of Students for Life presented coherent views, so I will address them together.

The crux of their argument was that legal acknowledgment of a "right to die" shows a societal lack of appreciation for the value of human life, independent of the morality of individual suicides. 

Suppose that we have legally recognized a "right to die." Consider the following line of reasoning:

>Alice is suffering and terminally ill. She reasons "I am no longer useful. My life is not worth living as it adds nothing to the collective good. In fact, I am a drain on society. So it would be better that I end my life."

Societal recognition (de facto or de jure legalization, constitutional enshrinement of such a right e.g.) of assisted suicide helped to legitimize Alice's reasoning. Such reasoning, they argue, displays a fundamental lack of appreciation for human life, both on Alice's part and the part of the lawmakers. This kind of reasoning treats human life as a mere means to collective good, rather than as an end in itself. No one would want to live in a society treats people as mere means. We should value all human life, and instead of encouraging Alice to end her life, we should try to relieve her suffering.

Additionally, they cast doubt on the idea that Alice's suicide can be rational. Although the future seems bleak, she does not know what her future holds, so how does she know that death will be better than the alternative? They contended that in the the face of such doubt, society should try to alleviate her suffering rather than encouraging her to take her own life.

The two members of SfL also raised practical concerns about the regulation of assisted suicide in practice, citing a case in the Netherlands where a woman with Alzheimer's who had consented to being euthanized when her "mind was gone" had to be restrained in order to deliver a lethal injection.

Sometimes, a patient in a persistent vegetative state who is disconnected from life support by his family members or doctors. SfL distinguished this as a case of "letting die" as opposed to "killing." SfL asserted that letting die is different from physician assisted suicide but did not specify how.

### For a right to die: My partner

My partner's view paid homage to Locke and Mill. We own our bodies (cf. Locke) and thus may dispose of them as we please, as we would our other possessions, as long as we don't harm others in the process (cf. Mill). Suicide (destruction of the body) is a direct result of our self-ownership. (n.b. Locke did not support suicide, as he believed that our bodies were the work, hence property, of a creator)

He emphasized that suicide is not so much deciding _that_ we will die, as a matter of deciding _when_ we will die. If we are utilitarians or egoistic hedonists we may believe that, in the face of sure and intense suffering, we may prefer not to live at all. Furthermore, if we are universal utilitarians, we may believe that the ending of these people's lives would be better for everyone, so long as they die by their own volition.

___

### How do we disagree?

Both of the views I have just described are incomplete, as would be any view on this complex issue as articulated in a ten minute speech. While my summary doesn't do them justice, even under the most charitable completions, both views must This is what makes the issue of assisted suicide so fruitful. 

I think that the disagreement between these largely consists in differing understanding of the nature of the entities at hand: the state, the person, and rights (for rights are things, albeit metaphysical). Thus, my response must discuss the necessary properties of those entities under each view, examining the consequences, and presenting a more accurate view.

In addition, to the structural problems which all points of view faced, the debate did not consider important practical problems like the moral relevance of the participation of another party in a suicide, the moral significance of intention and the nature of persons. I hope to say something on these matters.

#### Rights

As I reiterated during the debate, I feel that it is misleading to frame the issue of assisted suicide with the concept of the framing of "rights." Without explicit recognition, each side used a different idea of rights. Rather than try to resolve this difference in favor of any single view, I believe that we should set aside the concept altogether.

Rights give us duties and responsibilities. Property rights, for example, invoke a bundle of duties imposed upon others regarding what they may do to another's property. You may not, without my permission, use, destroy, modify etc. my property. But these rights may be overridden. Suppose that I use my car to block your driveway. By using my car to hinder your legitimate use of your driveway, I forfeit some of the rights which I have over my car in other spaces.

Some people believe that there are rights which may not be overridden, such as the right to life. Perhaps such rights exist but the right to life is regularly forfeited, and is thus not among them. For example, if I attack you it is reasonable to suppose that you might act in self defense and harm or kill me. Criminals, enemy combatants, casualties of war may all be legitimately killed by the state.

What matters in all of these cases is not rights _qua_ rights, but rather the obligations that rights entail. The system of rights proposes that there is a property invariant among people (rights) that entails certain duties, and such a system is only as good as it correctly describes and explains the duties that we have towards one another and to ourselves.

But as we have seen above, the system of rights hardly provides the invariant we are looking for. While they do capture an aspect of common-sense belief about what is right and wrong, their explanatory power is weakened because they are not truly invariant. A system with many exceptions is not systemic, unless the exceptions them are systematic. And if the exceptions are systematic, we should try to understand why.

Rather we should directly ask about reasons, beliefs and facts without presuming that the framework of rights is the best reductive explanatory line of inquiry.

Regarding assisted suicide, we should try to answer the following questions:

Moral questions:
* When is it permissible to kill oneself? 
* When is it rational to kill oneself? 
* When is it permissible to kill a person with their ongoing consent?
* When is it permissible to kill an incompetent person with their prior consent?
* When is it morally permissible to kill an person with their consent?

Political questions:
* When should suicide be legal?
* When should assisted suicide be legal?

I believe that the views summarized above fail to satisfactorily address some or all of the questions above, or fail for structural reasons.

___

### Against SfL: Deflating the "Norm" Argument

(this form of argument is due to Brennan and Jaworski)

No one wnts to live in a soceity that shows a lack of appreciation for human life. That is the the basic intuition from which SfL's "norm" argument draws its force. Inasmuch as legal rights are like societal permissions, they reflect the values of the society which declares them. So if the act of assisting suicide shows disregard for the human life being taken, a society displays a lack a collective underappreciation for the value of human life by sanctioning assisted suicide in the form of a right. So SfL argued. 

But does assisting suicide _necessarily_ display a lack of concern for human life? If our beliefs about assisted suicide are merely societally contingent, maybe we should change them in the face of prevailing concerns. In arguing that the norm argument shows disregard for human life, SfL considered onyl a few possible rationales, utilitarian chief among them. But they did not what is logically required of the norm argument: that assisting suicide _under any rationale_ displays a lack of concern for human life.

Consider the following example (based on the Fore people of Papua New Guinea)

>The Fore people believed that the proper way to show respect for their dead was to eat their brains. They said "Burying and burning are for garbage! Interring or cremating our dead treats them like garbage. We should treasure their souls by eating their brains." 

>But they learned that cannibalism (especially of brains) transmits the incurable neurodegenerative disease called Kuru, killing hundreds every year. So they changed their customs. Some were at first uncomfortable with the idea of burying their dead, but they found it acceptable if it alleviated the suffering caused by the Kuru disease. Over time their customs changed, and now suffers slow mental decline and death from Kuru.

As the example of the Fore illustrates, societal attitudes about the meanings of our actions are contingent. Acknowledging assisted suicide human life does not _necessarily_ disregard human life, just as cannibalism was not necessary to show respect for the dead. Societal norms have often been revised in our own society. Take moral attitudes about the moral significance of race, or gender.

Just as the suffering from Kuru justified a changed in the Fore people's values and funerary practices, perhaps intense suffering in the end of life justifies a change in our societal attitudes towards assisted suicide. We should take this concern to heart, and remember that our attitudes are not fixed, and should be changed if we discover other morally significant facts.

Perhaps our situation is like this:

>We believed that the proper way to show respect for the terminally ill was to never kill, even with consent. We said "Killings like those are for criminals and animals, not for innocent people. We should respect the dignity of their lives and allow them to die." 

>But when we came to a more clear understanding of the nature of people, we realized that we could humanely achieve these people's wishes and alleviate their suffering at the same time. Some people uncomfortable with the idea at first, but they found it acceptable if it alleviated suffering for the terminally ill. Over time customs changed, and now the terminally ill need not suffer.

While living in a society which recognizes assisted suicide might make us uncomfortable today, this does not mean that we cannot and should not try to change our attitudes towards the idea. The Fore changed their minds once they learned of the morally significant matters at stake. We may do the same.

Thus, the norm argument can be defensibly denied. It remains an open question whether assisted suicide would in fact provide societal benefits, a situation which is not as clear as the causation of cannibalism and Kuru. But it is clear that our attitude towards assisted suicide are not what matters. We should be open to changing our attitude just as the Fore people changed their attitude towards cannibalism. We should view this change with hope and optimism.

### Against the Logic of the "norm" argument

In addition to the counterexample posed above, we should be skeptical of the norm arguments because of its logic. I believe that the norm argument gets the order wrong when it considers what rights say about society.

Consider three possible versions of the rights argument's first premise

1. If it is the prevailing view among the people of a society that A is permissible, then that society will acknowledge a legal right to A
2. If a society acknowledges that A is permissible through a legal right, then the prevailing view of its people is that A is permissible

In order for the norm argument to function, SfL must accept (2). To paraphrase, (2) is about the way that the law _changes_ people's opinions. (1) is about the way that the law _reflects_ people's opinions. If it is merely the case that the law reflects people's opinions, (1), this is not enough. We need (2) that the law changes people's opinions. This may be the case, but it is a matter of considerable debate. Probably, a change in the law would not change the opinions of SfL members.

It is not enough to argue that laws are _expressions_ of societal values, they must actually _change_ them for the norm argument to work. I think that this dependency weakens the norm argument.

#### The Semiotics of Utility

I have called the norm argument into doubt in two ways. First, I argued that SfL failed to demonstrate the necessity of disrespect in assisting suicide, and proposed an alternate view. Second, I argued that their argument commmited them to a premise far more suspect than they acknowledged.

I will now return to the question of whether assisting suicide disrespects human life.

Although I believe that we now have reason to doubt the norm argument, we can also contest its second premise: that those who assist suicide lack respect or concern for human life.


SfL argued more specifically that "those who advocate for assisted suicide on utilitarian grounds necessarily lack respect or concern for human life."

I will not deny this, but

I wish to briefly consider whether it assisting suicide or committing suicide necessarily reveals something morally significant about our disposition.

For those who would argue using the norm argument it is not enough that, in fact, all those who favor assisted suicide don't sufficiently value human life. They must also demonstrate that it is necessarily so. 

#### What's so great about human life?

Why respect human life?

---

#### Against my partner: Personal Autonomy and Utilitarianism

My partner, arguing for the right to die, drew both on self-determination and utilitarianism to justify assisted suicide. But I believe that these two ideas are in conflict with each other. We may not be true utilitarians and also hold a Lockean view of total self-ownership.

Suppose that we hold that people may do whatever they please with their bodies and property, the right which also legitimizes suicide.

>I love smoked ham, so I build a smoker in my backyard. But the smoke wafts over the boundaries of my property, mildly annoying my neighbors. But when my neighbors too buy smokers, the smog is significant and unbearable for all, although the effect of each smoker is insignificant.

Such classic cases of externalities, where the addition of each smoker harms no one in particular but the sum harms a great many people significantly, place autonomy and utilitarianism in conflict. Utilitarianism is impersonal. Utilitarians argue that each person is entitled to the benefits of an action. It does not matter _to whom_ an action befalls so much as how much the total utility is affected by the action. Objection to the impersonality principle has formed the basis of objections as varied as Rawls and Nozick. 

#### Rationality of suicide

All parties of the debate considered the question of whether suicide can be rational. This matters because irrationality is often used as justification for paternalism. If we are paternalists with regard to irrationality, we should act to prevent people from committing irrational suicides.

So independent of the justification of paternalism, we may wish to argue for suicide's rationality/irrational.

#### Utility and human dignity

SfL also argued that utilitarianism treats people as mere means. When people are no longer useful to society, they should be killed or kill themselves. I believe that this version of utilitarianism is too easy a target. We can simply revise our utility function to include preference satisfaction.

Utility as preference satisfaction suffers from well known problems such as the "utility monster," a person who derives immense utility from killing others, such that the utility reaped by doing so outweighs any negative effects on his victims and their families.

Nonetheless, 

#### Why not regulate?

#### What do you regulate?

#### Death by contract

#### Aside: What does assisting suicide _necessarily_ say about us?

(the example below is due to Parfit "On What Matters" vol. 1)

Say that

>Alice encounters a snake in the desert. She believes that 1a) If I stay still the snake will bite me and I will die and 2a) I do not want to die, so she starts to run away. Little does she know that this snake only attacks moving targets. The snake bites her, and she dies.

Alice's beliefs were incorrect, but she did not act irrationally according to those beliefs. 

>Bob encounters the same snake in the desert. He believes that 1b) If I move, the snake will bite me and I will die and 2b) I want to die, so he starts to run away. The snake bites him, and he dies.

Both Alice and Bob die from snake bites

The two speakers who argued that people don't/shouldn't have a right to die presented a single coherent view so I'll address their arguments together. My partner and I had differing views so I describe his separately. I don't have a recording of the debate, but I have tried to represent all arguments to the best of my memory, and with the greatest charity. I will respond to these arguments with my own, revised, arguments. 


anti

mis-characterizing rights
mis-characterizing utilitarianism
rights as societal norms
why wouldn't we want to live in such a society?
skirting the moral problems
not legislate: ambivalence. Why not regulate?

pro
autonomy and utilitarianism are in conflict here
can't have cake and eat it too. choose one

>Bob has entered a persistent vegetative state after suffering a stroke. His doctors believe that he will not regain consciousness. They judge, correctly, that without continual life-support he will perish quickly. They decide to cease life support.

This case, of letting die, they argued is different from assisted suicide.

