---
title: "Towards an aesthetics of food"
excerpt: "What makes food good? How can we use a theory of food to be better cooks and eaters?"
comments: true
categories: 
  - food
tags:
  - food
  - cooking
  - aesthetics
---

I've been on the hunt for quality discussions of food aesthetics. Unfortunately, I have found few interesting texts on the topic. (perhaps Nicola Perullo's "Taste as Experience," though my survey is obviously incomplete; please advise) Most books on the "philosophy of food" (e.g. the eponymous collection ed. Kaplan) focus on questions surrounding the production and social context of food. For example, the ethical/environmental concerns surrounding mass agriculture, food transportation, and animal husbandry. Or the ways in which our consumption of food expresses social class, cultural heritage, or values.

But these are not the questions which concern me every day as eater and chef. I wish to know about the essential parameters of the eating experience, to answer questions such as: What is good food? How is it made? I use the adjective "good" here in the common way of talking about "good art" or "good music." That I choose not to restrict myself to the more specific qualities of "tastiness" or "beauty" or "ethicality" reflects my broad and interdisciplinary view of eating.

Indeed, food's quotidian nature surely contributed to its near total neglect by those interested in art and beauty. Plato regarded food as a utility to be properly regulated by medicine, a science rather than an art. Most home cooks do not regard themselves as artists. 

But cookery, like speech or movement, can be practiced at many levels, and just as everyday speech and movement carry aesthetic qualities, so does everyday food. Its ubiquity should not discredit its aesthetic potential. It is clear from the elevated food cultures that exist around the world that food is a primary domain of the exertion of taste, as primal as sounds or images. Fine food has all the qualities of an aesthetic experience: it's preparation may be creative, inspired, practiced, perfected, meaningful, its consumption savored, compared, criticized.

If any doubt remains that the gustatory experience is worthy of the same serious investigation as the experience of the fine arts, we need only recall that "taste," that much-maligned sense associated with eating over any other activity, is synonymous with the faculty of aesthetic distinction. I believe that this is no coincidence. Just as the first aesthetic preferences that we express as children are likely to be about food, so gustatory experience may be the starting point for a discussion of a comprehensive aesthetics which extends beyond the fine arts to encompass a broad range of experiences of discrimination.

The end of this enterprise is not solely descriptive either. Armed with and informed by a clear understanding of the aesthetic dimensions of food, we may creatively extend them. That is, we may use our understanding of the principles of degustation to create new "oeuvres de cuisine" which surprise and delight the palate and all the other senses. This seems a noble goal indeed.

### The dimensions of food


