---
title: "Response to Denby on \"Insomnia culture\"" in the Maroon"
excerpt: "Natalie Denby's much circulated op-ed on competitive-sleep-deprivation at UChicago is so close to understanding"
comments: true
categories: 
    - 
tags:
    - 
---

A couple of my friends shared Natalie Denby's recent Chicago Maroon op-ed on their Facebook walls (you can read it [here](link)). Apparently, they recognized Denby's descriptions of competitive-sleep-deprivation, and shared her desire to bring an end to this posturing of misery. 

I too would like people to be happy, and I think that posturing is stupid. But I think it'll take a little more than Denby's feeble plea to change the student culture distilled in her anecdotes of sleep-comparison.

Denby is a poor writer: she couches every judgement. In order to assert that those who compete for the badge of "fewest hours slept" are wrong to do so, she merely asserts that it is "unclear" why the do. Denby is so tantilizingly close to actually clarifying the phenomenon, yet I have the sense that in not doing so she weakens her argument fatally. If we don't understand why we habitually misbehave, how shall we decry our imprudence? how shall we intriduce change?



That students reckon hours-slept-per-night as golfers reckon strokes-per-hole, at times in jest, at times in earnest, is clearly manifestation of an attitude common among students in the college: that if one wishes to succeed, one must work as much as possible. Life of the mind, life of the grind. In order to do better than our peers, we need only work longer, harder than them.

This attitude, coupled with the academic insecurity fostered by the concentration of bright young minds in the 10 square blocks of HP leads inevitably to the kind of "sizing up" that Denby describes.

And this attitude is probably common because it was this same attitude that helped these students "grind" through the homework, extracurricular activities, and "life experiences" that bolstered the resumes and got them into a selective university.

The problem is that the ethic of deprivation (let's call it "acadmeic asceticism") became a habit. Whenever we were suffering most, we suceeded the most. This positive feedback reinforced our belief that suffering was the cause of our success.

When we feel unable to control our academic fates, which seem to be in control of capricious teacher/erinyes, we resort to that which was shown to work in the past, and repeat the cycle of deprivation.

So how to change this? How shall we eradicate the culture of sleep deprivation? the culture which ariticulates "more time spent in reg is better than less?" Clearly this goal will require more than a limply written marron op ed.

Moreover, it's not clear that we should try to eradicate the attitude which leads to competitive-insonmia at all, when we consider that it is this ame attitude which drives students to achieve academically.

We could merely deny that sleep deprivation is not the right means to achieve the ascetic aim: we should sleep because it helps us grind better, but this is an empirical judgement. In the absence of any proof that sleeping less causes less success than sleeping more, this arguement cannot convince.

Rather than denying that sleep deprivation isn't the right means to achieve academic success, I believe that we should deny a more fundamental premise: that academic succes is deeply valuable at all.

