---
title: "\"My Neighbor Totoro\" still moves me"
excerpt: "A favorite childhood film now feels sad. What changed?"
comments: true
categories: 
  - film
tags:
  - review
  - Doc Films
  - Studio Ghibli
---

On Saturday evening (1/27) I watched "My Neighbor Totoro" at UChicago's student-run film society, Doc Film in a special 30th anniversary screening. Totoro was my introduction to Japanese animation and I have fond memories of the film as a child. Like the protagonistic sisters Satsuki and Mei, I spent many a summer afternoon playing outside in gardens, forests, or marshes, hoping to catch a glimpse of Totoro, or at least a rabbit or two.

Watching Totoro with adult eyes though, I grew nostalgic yet confused. At moments when I was holding back tears, first time viewers (or so I presume) were laughing around me. The sadness was momentary, but the incogruity of my responses with those of other viewers confirmed to me that the film which I had loved a child was in some way lost. 

### Arriving home

We meet the Kusakabe family (Satsuki, Mei, and father Tatsuo) aboard an improbably laden jalopy, rattling its way through the Japanese countryside. We will later be able to infer that they are relocating to a country-house closer to the hospital where the mother is convalescing, although this house is far from the university where the father teaches. (Incidentally is not very close to the hospital either. This seems like a poor choice of house.)

These hardships are never clearly written. For now, Tatsuo puts on a pleased smile. He is calm and collected, standing strong with his arms akimbo. Satsuki and Mei laugh constantly as they cartwheel around the yard.

In the first scenes, which depitc the move-in, it is Satsuki, not her father, who seems to does most of the work. Perhaps this is only a matter of perspective, but as will later learn that her father is well meaning but absent minded. While this mental and physical absence doesn't seem negligent, it is worth noting that he is gone both times Mei goes missing, buried in papers and at the university respectively. On each occasion, it falls upon Satsuki to recover her lost sister.

Satsuki's dutiful acceptance of familial responsibility is by all appearances heartfelt and never resented or questioned, as every character in Totoro (in a properly Japanese way) accepts adversity without question, be it farming, late days at the university, or chores.

Though Satsuki is in late elementary school at the latest, for much of the film she acts _in loco parentis_, most critically when Mei goes missing the second time. Satsuki blames herself for failing to care for her sister. 

Satsuki runs for miles looking for Mei, following the same roads as the moving truck. This time, though, she is utterly alone. A farmer cannot aid her, two passers-by on a motorcycle offer little more than their surprise at the distance she has run. (this moment pained me, but elicited laughs from the theater) But this despair is not to last, for Totoro and his companions resolve everything in a deus-ex-machina, bringing together the whole family.

In the closing scene, the mother jokes that she wants to "spoil" the children for a while when she comes home, and they all laugh, everything seems back to normal. But how could it be?

Having so lately contemplated the death of her sister (and my implication, the death of her mother, the non-return of her father), how could Satsuki just "go back to normal?" Is this magical intervention (and the happy ending) all a dream? Earlier events suggest that the magical works of Totoro do not permanesce beyond the evanscent dream/life barrier. Perhaps the truth is far more mundane, if sad.

### Embodying Totoro

Suppose we are to take Totoro as imaginary. Why do Satsuki and Mei imagine this particular sort of creature at this critical time in their lives?

Satsuki is only grounded individual in the ensemble. Indeed, she is the only one who ever countenances the possibility that her mother might die. Even "Obachan," the kindly next door neighbor, denies it repeatedly.

In this sad realism, Satsuki is alone. Perhaps this is why it is also she who is most able to interface with the magical world of "Totoro." The great beast intervenes at crucial intervals when loss looms close (father doesn't return on the bus, Mei goes missing) and it is clear that he is a beast (troll, as subtitled) His ursine qualities somehow must resist the temptation to turn him into the ideal plush toy.

I theorize that Totoro here as the embodiment of the fears of moving and loss, made softer by the limitations of children's imagination. And this is not all bad: In a moment of despair when their father is late, Totoro gives the girls seeds. He later helps them grow a garden with those seeds while they sleep, "setting down roots" in their new home. The Totoro, rather than something to be feared, becomes a vessel for worries which is ever compliant in productively resolving them, through play and persistence.

### "Let's laugh to keep ghosts away"

Near the beginning of the film, the girls and their father are taking a bath when a miraculously strong wind shakes the house. Their father puts on silly faces and tells them (as subtitled) "let's laugh to keep the bogeymen away." Their forced laughts turn to real laughs as they play in the bath and soot-sprites are driven out of the house. But we see that, eventually, this strategy of coping is incompatible with the depth of the situation which confronts this family. Laughter ceases to be an important part of the film while the bogeymen become real, and important.

The best support for Tatsuo's coping mechanism seem to be the moments when he and his wife mutually confirm that any concerns for her health are unfounded. It really was "just a cold." But this is deeply unsatisfying. The mother (unnamed) is an useless, thin character who does not move the other characters at all. We are (briefly) reminded that the girls do in fact have a mother, for exmaple when Mei says that she will sleep in bed with her mother when she comes home or when the mother suggests that she "spoil" the children for a little while when she returns. 

But these dreams aim at the recovery of an unreachable past, and are in the end uproductive. As Satsuki and Mei looking into their mother's hospital room from a tree, they see their parents laughing. How? for what? the children are still alone.

### Spirited Away

This bizzare reading Totoro as a sort of friendly bogeyman, an embodiment of the childhood anxieties of growing up was founded on the visceral feeling of unfulfilled sadness that I felt this time, of all the times I've seen it. 

Maybe this is because I deeply feel that the real-matter of Totoro is merely that of Spirited Away, although these themes only reach their true fulfillment in the later Ghibli film.

Both feature a strong female protagonist (Satsuki/Chihiro) who, while moving, enters a mystical land where her feelings of alienation and dislocation become embodied in fantastic beings (Totoro/Spirits) which she must supplicate in order to overcoming her fears and set down roots in her new home.

Viewed in this sense, Spirited Away is by far the more effective film. There, we feel a loneliness in Sen/Chihiro that we only glimpse in Satsuki, and the thematic material is much more evenly worked, the cast pruned to place the focus on the central drama of the heroine: the object of care, Mei replaced by Chihiro/Sen's parents, turned into pigs (the time that they are pigs is akin ot the time that the father is at the university) and the token character of the ailing mother is cut altogether.

### What's wrong with cute?

Thirty years later, Totoro remains popular with good reason. The Japanese countryside, Obachan's vegetable garden, Totoro sleeping in his den: these are indelible images that capture the feeling of a magical summer. But other images, like that of mei sitting on a forlorn hillside in the setting sun, five solemn stone statues sillhouetted behind her, or of Satsuki, struggling to run home in search of Mei, remain as well, unsettling me still.

I had hoped to feel childlike joy upon viewing Totoro, now for the dozenth time, and I was vindicated in that the friend who I brought to see it did feel that joy. Only it was gone for me. Still charming as ever, Totoro had a different tone.

I hope that it will be as different the next time I watch it.