---
title: "Debate: Assisted Suicide"
excerpt: "On the right to die"
comments: true
categories: 
    - philosophy
tags:
    - suicide
---

I recently spoke in a debate on the motion "people have a right to die" and I feel that I didn't express a coherent view, nor did I sufficiently address my fellow debaters' arguments. I'll try to do that here. 

Those arguing that people do not/should not have a right to die) did so as members of Students for Life, so I will refer to their arguments jointly as SfL. My partner and I had differing views on who people might have a right to die, so I will refer to his view with his initials: DL.

I don't have a recording on hand, so I'll try to represent their arguments to the best of my memory. Then, I will respond to them and supply my own, revised, arguments. 

### Against a right to die: SfL

Is it wrong to commit suicide? On this, the anti-legalization side conceded that an argument in favor of the immorality of suicide might require the existence of a higher power.

Instead, they argued that acknowledgment of such a right (for instance, on utilitarian calculi) shows a lack of appreciation for the value of persons, treating them merely for their utility. 

From the premise that rights are societal conventions which reflect collective attitudes, they argued that a society which legally recognizes the right to die is one that fundamentally misvalues human life, and such society is not one that anyone would like to live in.

Additionally, they sought to cast doubt on the idea that suicide could be rational. I do not know what my future holds, so how do I know that death is better than the alternative? They contended that it would be better to try to ameliorate the causes of discomfort rather than end life.

### For a right to die: DL

DL's view was reminiscent of Locke or Mill. Firstly, we own our bodies (cf. Locke) and thus may dispose of them as we please, as we would our other possessions, adding that we shouldn't harm others in the process (pace Mill). Further, on a theory of egoistic hedonism, it may be better to die than to live while suffering in extreme pain. Such a right ought to be recognized by society on utilitarian grounds.

### Responding

As I reiterated during the debate, I feel that the framing of this question around "rights" is misleading. Without explicit recognition, both sides used different conceptions of rights.

On SfL's view, rights are like societal norms. If we hold that "it would be better of most people in our society believed that people ought not to kill themselves" or "it would be better if most people in our society believed that they should not take innocent human lives" then our government should not enshrine the right to die, as it would cause more people to be of this disposition, which would be bad. 

These notions of rights miss an essential feature of a right which is that it imposes duties or constraints on our actions. When we say that 

Still, though, these questions skirt around what seem to me the most important questions of the issue


Moral questions:
1. Is it ever morally permissible to kill oneself?
2. Is it ever rational to kill oneself?
3. Is it ever morally permissible to kill a competent with their ongoing consent?
4. Is it ever morally permissible to kill an incompetent person with their prior consent?

Political questions:
1. Should suicide be legal?
2. Should assisting suicide be legal? Under what terms?

### Reframing the question

anti

mischaracterizing rights
mischaracterizing utilitarianism
rights as societal norms
why wouldn't we want to live in such a society?
skirting the moral problems
not legislate: ambivalence. Why not regulate?

pro
autonomy and utlitarianism are in conflict here
can't have cake and eat it too. choose one
